[00:00.000 --> 00:08.000]  Thank you, and welcome to my presentation.
[00:08.000 --> 00:12.720]  AppStream collaboration and Linux distribution collaboration is very excluded.
[00:12.720 --> 00:19.920]  In my case, I'm representing two projects, OpenSUSE, where I'm a member and a representative,
[00:19.920 --> 00:24.120]  and then the OpenMainframe project, where I'm leading the Linux distribution working
[00:24.120 --> 00:29.960]  group with the most important Linux distribution included, who are running on the mainframe
[00:29.960 --> 00:40.840]  I'm Sara Krisch, and my agenda is first something about myself, how I came to this topic, then
[00:40.840 --> 00:47.800]  you should receive a short introduction about the mainframes and the OpenMainframe project,
[00:47.800 --> 00:53.600]  what that is and what we are providing, then why we have founded the Linux distribution
[00:53.600 --> 00:59.880]  working group, from that we are coming to the topic of the reason why we wanted to collaborate,
[00:59.880 --> 01:09.040]  and in the last step I want to tell how we are including AppStream projects at the moment,
[01:09.040 --> 01:16.080]  and what we want to achieve, and I want to receive a little bit feedback in the Q&A session,
[01:16.080 --> 01:25.120]  how you as OpenSUSE projects want to be included in such architecture specific working groups
[01:25.120 --> 01:33.280]  or collaboration projects, then about myself a little bit, I'm an OpenSUSE contributor
[01:33.280 --> 01:39.200]  since around 10 years, and I'm also a member of a release engineering team, and I'm responsible
[01:39.200 --> 01:44.600]  for the S390X architecture, therefore I'm also the team lead for S390X at OpenSUSE,
[01:44.600 --> 01:52.240]  I wrote my bachelor phases at IBM, and afterwards I became a DevOps consultant at Accenture,
[01:52.240 --> 01:58.600]  I'm also allowed to contribute a little bit to OpenSUSE via my job, but anyway, I had
[01:58.600 --> 02:05.480]  this idea then to found the Linux distribution working group, and I am with that also the
[02:05.480 --> 02:12.120]  co-chair of this Linux distribution working group, mainframes perhaps not everybody knows
[02:12.120 --> 02:20.720]  them, that is the latest, is he 16 system on the right side, that mainframes are a large
[02:20.720 --> 02:27.600]  high performance computer systems and are also called big engines, the architecture
[02:27.600 --> 02:37.440]  behind IBM C is the S390X architecture, the X came at the end for the 64 bit architecture
[02:37.440 --> 02:42.920]  which is also included in such a system, and such systems are used for mission critical
[02:42.920 --> 02:49.680]  data, for banking services, and everything else, and you can run thousands of VMs on
[02:49.680 --> 02:58.760]  such a system, the open mainframe project is a hardware project for the mainframe, and
[02:58.760 --> 03:06.960]  it has been funded in the year 2015, and this project is under the hood of the Linux foundation,
[03:06.960 --> 03:12.080]  and should have the focal point for deployments and the usage of Linux and open source in
[03:12.080 --> 03:18.880]  a mainframe computing environment, therefore we have got multiple mainframe centric projects
[03:18.880 --> 03:24.680]  where I will not explain all the projects because the time is a little bit missing,
[03:24.680 --> 03:32.520]  but we have got also a mentorship program included, cobalt perhaps some have known before,
[03:32.520 --> 03:41.720]  but most projects are more COS based, therefore it is no surprise that we have funded our
[03:41.720 --> 03:50.480]  Linux distribution working group inside of this open mainframe project also, and besides
[03:50.480 --> 03:56.960]  of that we have got also a cobalt working group and COS enablement working group, COS
[03:56.960 --> 04:04.600]  is an alternative operating by IBM and a little bit commercial, but IBM is working on it to
[04:04.600 --> 04:12.520]  provide also open source projects for that, here we can see a little bit the overview of all included
[04:12.520 --> 04:21.640]  Linux distributions, SUSE, Red Hat and Ubuntu have joined after the community Linux distributions
[04:21.640 --> 04:29.640]  with Debian, Open SUSE and Fedora, SUSE is our sponsor of the Linux distribution working group,
[04:29.640 --> 04:38.640]  and then also Rocky Linux and IMA Linux have joined forward, our structure, Elisabeth and I,
[04:38.640 --> 04:45.720]  we had the idea to found this Linux distribution working group at IBM C-Day two years ago,
[04:45.720 --> 04:52.000]  and then we said we don't want to have it only for one or two Linux distributions,
[04:52.000 --> 05:00.680]  we want to have it for all that we can achieve better support and better collaboration between
[05:00.680 --> 05:06.680]  all of them, then we said we want to have a minimum of one representative for every Linux
[05:06.680 --> 05:12.360]  distribution that is required for the input from the distribution side, and yes SUSE said
[05:12.360 --> 05:21.760]  we want to sponsor it, our goals are creating a place for collaboration across Linux distributions,
[05:21.760 --> 05:31.000]  we are the open mainframe project, mailing list, the wiki and the chat, then we wanted to provide
[05:31.000 --> 05:40.360]  a space for distributions to request for help on their S390X ports, if there is something not
[05:40.360 --> 05:48.240]  working or anything else like that, and then we had also the goal to ensure any and all
[05:48.240 --> 05:53.080]  infrastructure required should be available for supporting the ports, therefore you can
[05:53.080 --> 06:00.640]  request hardware and everything else, Debian has got his own mainframe as an example, you can
[06:00.640 --> 06:08.200]  request support from the Linux one community cloud, I have got also a slide about that included,
[06:08.200 --> 06:15.960]  and when I said I want to have better support from IBM to fix S390X specific bugs, we have
[06:15.960 --> 06:24.040]  got the distinguished engineer Ulrich Weigern included here for that, and therefore we are
[06:24.040 --> 06:32.800]  collaborating via the mailing list with him and our meeting sessions. When our collaborative
[06:32.800 --> 06:38.960]  process is in the first step, the problem discussions on the mailing list, if anything is
[06:38.960 --> 06:46.720]  happening, we can discuss the problems, we can reproduce issues sometimes in our Linux
[06:46.720 --> 06:54.640]  distributions, discuss it on the mailing list, and then we are forwarding issues and ideas of
[06:54.640 --> 07:02.440]  improvements for IBM that will be forwarded when internally, and then we have got also monthly
[07:02.440 --> 07:09.640]  meetings for half an hour every month, that is more come together with a review of what has
[07:09.640 --> 07:15.040]  happened in the month and what are the next steps, any other problems or any other news,
[07:15.040 --> 07:23.200]  and then we are sharing our knowledge also in this half an hour time. This collaboration is
[07:23.200 --> 07:30.520]  also a benefit for all, with that upstream contributions are available for all, that is
[07:30.520 --> 07:37.160]  lowering all the research and development costs, because we have got our point of contact,
[07:37.160 --> 07:43.280]  where there is an exchange between these distributions, we can come faster forward,
[07:43.280 --> 07:51.480]  and that is a benefit for IBM and the community. Additionally, we have got the same solutions
[07:51.480 --> 07:58.120]  for our Linux distributions, we can use the patches from Debian, Fedora, OpenSUSE, share it,
[07:58.120 --> 08:06.360]  bring it upstream, test it together, and with that we have got also the same solutions for
[08:06.360 --> 08:14.000]  S390 specific problems, we share our knowledge between the communities equal to here, we have
[08:14.000 --> 08:21.280]  got one deaf room together and sharing our knowledge here, that is also in our working
[08:21.280 --> 08:29.360]  group available. Then we are increasing a little bit also innovation, we have got diverse
[08:29.360 --> 08:37.680]  community ideas, we can bring it together and can forward it and bring the latest technologies
[08:37.680 --> 08:44.120]  into our Linux distributions, and with that we are accelerating also the Linux development for
[08:44.120 --> 08:54.320]  S390X. From that, if we are working together, I would say we can achieve more together than
[08:54.320 --> 09:02.280]  alone, and that is also the reason that IBM is providing the Linux one open source software
[09:02.280 --> 09:08.440]  community cloud, you can receive VMs on the Linux one systems, that is also our mainframe
[09:08.440 --> 09:16.320]  for Linux configuration, that is sponsored by IBM in the United States, and the Linux one
[09:16.320 --> 09:26.200]  community cloud provides 120 days for a single open source contributors with free access,
[09:26.200 --> 09:32.880]  you are receiving less Ubuntu and then we are providing also long-term access for open source
[09:32.880 --> 09:40.640]  projects. In our case, we have got five VMs for open source available and we maintain it for
[09:40.640 --> 09:47.200]  our own, we have upgraded a slas to open source on that, and with that we can develop also an
[09:47.200 --> 09:57.440]  open source foundation. With that, we are coming to the idea to include the upstream projects,
[09:57.440 --> 10:06.400]  it is easy to include base projects like the Linux kernel, compilers like GCC or KVM,
[10:06.400 --> 10:15.880]  because we have got all ready developers at IBM who are contributing as maintainers and
[10:15.880 --> 10:23.600]  they can interact directly on our issues and bug reports, but there are many other projects in
[10:23.600 --> 10:30.280]  Linux included, not only the kernel, not only toolchain and everything else, we are receiving
[10:30.280 --> 10:39.720]  new programming languages, we are using the latest databases or anything else, the Linux
[10:39.720 --> 10:49.640]  world is really wide. This is an example how we have done that in the GCC bug tracker, we can
[10:49.640 --> 10:59.160]  create a bug report that is arriving and then Andreas Krebel as an example and IBM developer
[10:59.160 --> 11:09.000]  is interacting on it and analyzing it and creates a fix. The process at GCC is upstream bug
[11:09.000 --> 11:17.520]  report, IBM maintainers are receiving all 390X specific bugs and the maintainers are interacting.
[11:17.520 --> 11:26.520]  One hint in this direction, these developers are also open for joining our Linux distribution
[11:26.520 --> 11:34.240]  working group for discussions, but from our point of view, that is not enough because there are
[11:34.240 --> 11:45.320]  many other projects, an example is Core, what I have created an issue last month because of the
[11:45.320 --> 11:52.960]  390X enablement which was not working, I created on GitHub my issue, the developer tried to fix it
[11:52.960 --> 12:02.720]  and said, I don't know how to fix it, I don't know 390X specific things, I asked when should I
[12:02.720 --> 12:10.480]  forward it to IBM, yes please, I wrote my email to the mailing list, Ulrich Weigand,
[12:10.480 --> 12:19.440]  the distinguished engineer has interacted when news directly, that is the problem at it and it
[12:19.440 --> 12:31.040]  has been working, but such a process is a little bit longer and requires us as Linux
[12:31.040 --> 12:38.960]  distribution maintainers in this case, should we include such project also with invitations to
[12:38.960 --> 12:47.960]  our mailing list or is this our responsibility to forward from the upstream project to IBM then,
[12:47.960 --> 12:58.320]  that is a question there, the reasons for such required forwarding is that there are so many
[12:58.320 --> 13:05.600]  open source projects everywhere, IBM does not know all the Linux integrated software and
[13:05.600 --> 13:15.280]  latest technologies, especially the new ones and most IBM maintainers are only available for the
[13:15.280 --> 13:22.360]  base projects which are called the strategic open source projects, which is a little bit funny,
[13:22.360 --> 13:31.440]  but in any way they have got their strategic projects, the maintainers are working on that
[13:31.440 --> 13:39.360]  and that's it, if anything new is coming in, they have to find someone responsible new for that
[13:39.360 --> 13:50.280]  one and yes, we the Linux distribution maintainers know our requirements and what we want to include
[13:50.280 --> 13:57.440]  as the latest technologies, therefore we want to achieve a new connection between IBM and
[13:57.440 --> 14:06.440]  upstream projects, what is missing at the moment. If you are interested for joining us as an
[14:06.440 --> 14:13.280]  upstream project or anything else, we are open for that now, here is our wiki link of the open
[14:13.280 --> 14:19.240]  mainframe project with the Linux distribution working group, then we have got our mailing list
[14:19.240 --> 14:28.400]  and our meeting sessions on Zoom every second Tuesday, the invitations are coming via the
[14:28.400 --> 14:37.080]  mailing list and now I want to use the rest of the time for discussions, how do you want to
[14:37.080 --> 14:47.040]  become involved into such architecture-specific working groups as an upstream project, one
[14:47.040 --> 14:55.840]  hint, we are also our distribution collaboration mailing lists available now, two weeks ago we
[14:55.840 --> 15:03.240]  have received an email, there is one from the kernel, then I have seen there is something for
[15:03.240 --> 15:11.520]  security topics, there is also for ARM architecture by Linaro I believe, one collaboration mailing
[15:11.520 --> 15:18.080]  list, something like that exists already, but what is your expectation and how do you want
[15:18.080 --> 15:24.560]  to be included if you have got problems with architecture-specific problems, have you got
[15:24.560 --> 15:47.680]  any wishes, Ben, say here, nothing?
[15:47.680 --> 16:06.680]  Yeah, by the way, your consistent branding across the various sub-projects that you had
[16:06.680 --> 16:11.680]  on the other slide, I just want to compliment it, it is really nice, like their way they
[16:11.680 --> 16:21.880]  are all using the same palette, sorry I didn't mean to mess up your slide system, you mean
[16:21.880 --> 16:31.360]  TCC and everything else, no, the various things under the open mainframe group, we have lost
[16:31.360 --> 16:44.000]  the slides now though, anyway, yes, I think that is super cool, I love it, so the distributions
[16:44.000 --> 16:49.680]  you had in there, I noticed you had Fedora in there and I saw Red Hat mentioned, is that
[16:49.680 --> 17:01.840]  mean Raoul is involved or?
[17:01.840 --> 17:20.640]  Yes, Red is also involved, if we want to give something forward to Red Hat, I am for open
[17:20.640 --> 17:48.120]  mainframe group, we have the
[17:48.120 --> 17:53.900]  Why is it not
[17:53.900 --> 18:03.540]  creating energy?
[18:03.540 --> 18:31.540]  Why does it not share it?
[18:31.540 --> 18:55.860]  And here we have got something about our Linux distributions with all information about
[18:55.860 --> 19:03.420]  our architecture, specific mailing lists and everything else, and who is responsible
[19:03.420 --> 19:04.420]  for what.
[19:04.420 --> 19:13.540]  Dan is listed here, Opensuzer is listed here, but I am responsible for the distributions.
[19:13.540 --> 19:20.620]  RockyLinux is listed here with Luis Arbel and Mustafa Gessen.
[19:20.620 --> 19:27.060]  And when we have got also our meeting session side where you are receiving an overview who
[19:27.060 --> 19:33.500]  is attending our meetings, therefore here you can see also the Debian responsible person,
[19:33.500 --> 19:42.500]  Deepak Zope, Nikolai is when you guys from Suser responsible for S390X who is joining
[19:42.500 --> 19:43.500]  our sessions.
[19:43.500 --> 19:51.820]  David Edelssohn is the CTO for Opensource at IBM, Ulrich Weigand is the Distinguished
[19:51.820 --> 20:00.660]  Engineer for Opensource and Linux, who for these persons are mostly the default persons
[20:00.660 --> 20:08.340]  joining us, Dan is only listed for Fedora because he has joined as a Fedora representative,
[20:08.340 --> 20:13.780]  but he is also responsible for S390X at Red Hat as a default.
[20:13.780 --> 20:20.700]  I was just, I am with CentOS project and we sit kind of midstream between Fedora and
[20:20.700 --> 20:24.500]  RAL, so I am just wondering like, you know, should we be getting involved or is it enough
[20:24.500 --> 20:29.900]  that we have Fedora involved, so, I will talk to our Fedora for a second.
[20:29.900 --> 20:37.580]  Yes, my wish was as a default, two different persons because we have also separated Opensuzer
[20:37.580 --> 20:40.460]  and Suser in our case.
[20:40.460 --> 20:45.660]  I asked multiple times at Red Hat, can we receive an additional person?
[20:45.660 --> 20:52.500]  Yes, I will forward it and nothing has happened and when Dan said, I am also from Red Hat,
[20:52.500 --> 20:56.380]  okay, when you are for both.
[20:56.380 --> 21:02.100]  We are open to have an additional person from Red Hat, but in general.
[21:02.100 --> 21:07.100]  Okay, I will forward it.
[21:07.100 --> 21:28.540]  Yes, if we have got from every distribution one person, why not?
[21:28.540 --> 21:45.300]  As an upstream maintainer, if you want to support S390, what will be the best way to
[21:45.300 --> 21:46.740]  kind of do it?
[21:46.740 --> 21:57.420]  So could we just document some contact points for your group, so we can say like, if we
[21:57.420 --> 22:05.260]  have some issues with supporting the S390 architecture, I can just, I will say, if we
[22:05.260 --> 22:13.460]  can fix it ourselves, try to follow up with your working group.
[22:13.460 --> 22:17.820]  Yes, that's our goal, what we want to provide.
[22:17.820 --> 22:24.420]  As a first step, we have got our mailing list, if you have got any problems or anything else,
[22:24.420 --> 22:29.420]  you can write to us and we will look how we can support you.
[22:29.420 --> 22:30.420]  Okay, so.
[22:30.420 --> 22:35.700]  All the IBM people who are required are also on this mailing list and they interact closed
[22:35.700 --> 22:44.340]  into two hours or something like that on the issues which are coming in and therefore that's
[22:44.340 --> 22:47.580]  our first step, how we want to include you.
[22:47.580 --> 22:53.540]  We are also open to include you in our meeting sessions then, but that would be the first
[22:53.540 --> 22:55.660]  step, how we can include you.
[22:55.660 --> 23:05.340]  Okay, so the preferred, I guess, point of contact for you would be for our development
[23:05.340 --> 23:06.340]  documentation.
[23:06.340 --> 23:10.700]  It depends on which upstream project you are, which one is that?
[23:10.700 --> 23:11.700]  For example, Python.
[23:11.700 --> 23:12.700]  That is Python.
[23:12.700 --> 23:21.940]  When Python, I expect, there should be also a point of contact upstream from IBM.
[23:21.940 --> 23:31.420]  But they don't know the whole module things, that is the problem, therefore, forward the
[23:31.420 --> 23:37.260]  issues and problems and when you are receiving the support.
[23:37.260 --> 23:40.100]  Yeah, that makes sense.
[23:40.100 --> 23:42.260]  Any further questions?
[23:42.260 --> 23:43.700]  Ben, we have.
[23:43.700 --> 23:46.980]  Perhaps two minutes.
[23:46.980 --> 23:55.900]  It seems the people from the next session are joining now.
[23:55.900 --> 23:58.900]  Thank you that you have joined my presentation.
[23:58.900 --> 23:59.900]  Awesome.
[23:59.900 --> 24:00.900]  Thank you.
[24:00.900 --> 24:17.940]  Thank you.
