[00:00.000 --> 00:11.760]  Okay. So, hi everyone. I'm here with the yearly, let's say, Unicraft Weather Report. It's
[00:11.760 --> 00:15.400]  mostly a community update of what we've been up to in the past year, and then I'm going
[00:15.400 --> 00:22.760]  to let Simone give up the technical side. As an intro, there's a lot of swag here, so
[00:22.760 --> 00:28.520]  if you want some Unicraft items, please get them from over there.
[00:28.520 --> 00:33.920]  So if you don't know what is Unicraft, Unicraft is a Unicolonel, the focus is on specialization.
[00:33.920 --> 00:38.400]  We call it extreme specialization, being able to customize it for your own needs. It has
[00:38.400 --> 00:43.440]  a build system, configuration system that makes it suitable for your item. Now, given
[00:43.440 --> 00:47.480]  this is the Weather Report, I'm going to give a political statement, and I'm going to say
[00:47.480 --> 00:52.840]  the State of the Community is strong, right? So we're doing it very well. It's going really
[00:52.840 --> 00:58.800]  good, and just to give you some items, this is what's been happening during the past year.
[00:58.800 --> 01:05.000]  So you can see this is where we were last year, and now we're over here. It was 1200
[01:05.000 --> 01:11.680]  about one week ago, I think we reached that limit. Some more metrics are there, so I don't
[01:11.680 --> 01:15.560]  have the exact numbers from last year, but I'm not going to keep a good track of each
[01:15.560 --> 01:22.040]  FOSDM entry, but this is mostly, so this is where we were approximately last year in terms
[01:22.080 --> 01:28.680]  of GitHub stars, Discord users. We had five releases. We do a release roughly every two
[01:28.680 --> 01:34.920]  months now because of constant pressure from Mihalis and the others. Mihalis is here, so
[01:34.920 --> 01:39.320]  I have to get on here. We're going to expand it to three months. It's kind of a lot of
[01:39.320 --> 01:45.080]  release pressure. We are having a lot of hackathons. There are three life hackathons, and you can
[01:45.080 --> 01:49.520]  also see the number of committees that are going over there. As hackathons, these are
[01:49.560 --> 01:55.200]  events where we evangelize Unicraft, Unicronals, and get people more in tune with the US topics
[01:55.200 --> 02:00.040]  and open source. These have been happening during the past years. We had three at Lyon,
[02:00.040 --> 02:05.520]  Aachen, and Munich, and they're also a nearly online hackathon. You call it Unicraft Summer
[02:05.520 --> 02:10.240]  of Code. This is for everyone in the world. It takes about two weeks. It's four hours
[02:10.240 --> 02:16.280]  per day where we use Discord and a lot of hacking challenges to get people to know more
[02:16.320 --> 02:23.560]  about Unicronals and Unicraft. These are some pictures. I think I see some people over here.
[02:23.560 --> 02:31.680]  Martin is here. Martin and Stefan. This is Stefan. This is Martin. This is Stefan, the
[02:31.680 --> 02:39.120]  white hair. Manuel. Manuel is here. You can see the tall, thin guy. He's over here as
[02:39.120 --> 02:46.200]  well. I think you're this one. This is Victor, right? This is on our university. This is
[02:46.800 --> 02:50.360]  I'm not sure if Yakov is here for Sartura. These were the Sartura guys that we met in
[02:50.360 --> 02:55.360]  Munich. These are all parts of items happening in the hackathon. If we are here, we need
[02:55.360 --> 03:03.160]  to do the proper praising. With many thanks to Michalis. Anastasius is over here as well.
[03:03.160 --> 03:09.480]  Thank you, Babis. I'm not sure if George was here. I'm not sure. Thank you so much for
[03:09.480 --> 03:15.520]  doing this. They're taking us to a tour in the classical era with the hackathon in Athens
[03:15.520 --> 03:21.080]  in late March. If you want to enjoy lovely weather, good food, and of course, Unicronal
[03:21.080 --> 03:28.280]  hacking, please join us. All the information is available if you join Unicraft.org website.
[03:28.280 --> 03:35.200]  You find the information, the form to enroll, and all the items like that. Join us there
[03:35.200 --> 03:43.920]  for two days of hacking. Also, during this time, you see those people here. Actually,
[03:44.000 --> 03:51.200]  even Michalis is here to manage to climb it. There's over here. This was a bunch of us.
[03:51.200 --> 03:56.600]  Yeah, there were the lazy people that stayed at the hotel. This was our first Unicraft
[03:56.600 --> 04:02.640]  meetup. It happened in Romania in October last year. We're going to, of course, make
[04:02.640 --> 04:11.040]  it happen again. Because Alex and Michalis are here and the jury still is debating who
[04:11.120 --> 04:17.280]  is going to win it. But we have the Papanasi. They loved so much. It's still up to debate.
[04:17.280 --> 04:22.320]  Who loves them more? It's a continuous battle there. We're going to see. Maybe next year
[04:22.320 --> 04:28.680]  we make a decision on that. As a final point, as we always discuss, very serious about it,
[04:28.680 --> 04:34.680]  what happens in Sinai stays in Sinai. No pictures, nothing. We know what happened, but no one
[04:34.680 --> 04:40.480]  is going to see those pictures. Getting a bit more on the unserious side, what we've
[04:40.480 --> 04:46.640]  been doing to get this happening is that the student engagement. As I'm also part of the
[04:46.640 --> 04:50.800]  university and also collaborating with other people from universities, you saw Lio Achan,
[04:50.800 --> 04:56.480]  Miuhan Athens. We talked to a lot of people in universities. They are going to be hackathons
[04:56.480 --> 05:01.520]  in Portugal. We are trying to do something in Amsterdam. I talked to Manuel about that.
[05:02.400 --> 05:07.440]  There's something in Canada, so we talk a lot of universities. We do a lot of student engagement
[05:07.440 --> 05:14.880]  via projects. We do mentorship. We take kind of one-on-one discussions with someone. We get
[05:14.880 --> 05:19.680]  into the project, and that's also part of Google Summer of Code, but not only that, and that gets
[05:19.680 --> 05:25.520]  more people in the community. Also, the hackathons, I mean, Martin is basically involved also in
[05:25.520 --> 05:31.360]  Newcraft community, apart from Rusty Hermit, because of the hackathon we were there, and we
[05:31.360 --> 05:36.240]  do challenges just to get people involved. We are a fairly welcoming community. We have a lot
[05:36.240 --> 05:40.880]  of beginner items, so if you just want to do something, you want to do a project, we have plenty
[05:40.880 --> 05:46.720]  of items, and we have a lot of mentorship bandwidth that help you get into the OS world.
[05:48.640 --> 05:53.040]  What we also been doing, this is part of maturing the project and the community. We started kind
[05:53.040 --> 05:58.400]  of creating some sort of hierarchy, so we started creating roles, so we have different roles for
[05:58.400 --> 06:03.680]  different topics. There's also what we call some sort of community leadership item with people working
[06:03.680 --> 06:09.680]  as PR manager, release manager, documentation manager, governance, CACD, so different people
[06:09.680 --> 06:15.840]  doing different things just to make sure everything is working properly. There's a lot of meetings.
[06:15.840 --> 06:22.160]  If you go to the calendar and if you see what's happening on Discord, a lot of things are happening.
[06:22.160 --> 06:28.640]  We discuss on different topics, be it Rust, security, app compatibility, a craft kit. Every
[06:28.640 --> 06:34.480]  topic has their own periodic meeting, usually a weekly meeting. There are some other high-level
[06:34.480 --> 06:39.600]  meetings. We keep a meeting summary of them. You can find the meeting summaries on Discord.
[06:39.600 --> 06:46.640]  Everything is kind of open and aiming to get people aware and devolved and make things transparent.
[06:47.840 --> 06:54.480]  During the past year, this was with help from Alex and Stefan, Stefan Jumara. We've been improving
[06:54.480 --> 07:01.280]  the documentation greatly. There are some things to do, but it's very good now. You get a lot of
[07:01.280 --> 07:09.040]  information on how you can use Unicraft. What's happened technically? These are the major features
[07:09.040 --> 07:14.000]  that you may have heard from other speakers. These have been happening during the past year, so
[07:14.000 --> 07:19.840]  S&P support, virtual memory support, internal metric system done by Chesar. There's a bit that
[07:19.840 --> 07:26.160]  requires Simone's attention. Muscle support has been integrated in the previous release. Binary
[07:26.160 --> 07:33.280]  compatibility, which Simone is going to talk about, is finally in, as of today, to the release.
[07:33.280 --> 07:38.480]  So we've been doing on that, but now it's going to be official. The Apple Flutter application is out
[07:38.480 --> 07:43.280]  there. With the help from Mihaly, you see a lot of arm security features and there's also
[07:44.240 --> 07:51.040]  the, there's an OSS roadmap, a HackMD.io, and the GitHub issue item with the OSS roadmap giving
[07:51.040 --> 07:57.280]  all the items. Actually, this should be, force them 22, right? So sorry. This is the slide for
[07:57.280 --> 08:06.160]  next year, but with some other items. And we are almost there. So my estimate is that the next
[08:06.160 --> 08:12.080]  release happening in late April is going to feature all of this. So the tooling upgrade for
[08:12.080 --> 08:17.120]  CraftKit, this is what Alex and Chesar have been working on, raw support with great help from
[08:17.120 --> 08:22.720]  Martin, who's been leading this. Integration of S&P support and synchronization, making sure it's
[08:22.720 --> 08:29.520]  going to be really used inside Unicraft. Integration testing, there is a bit of work to be done there.
[08:29.520 --> 08:33.520]  We need to do a lot of testing. We need to automate it. It's going to be part of the CSD system.
[08:34.560 --> 08:40.560]  There is a lot of security features we plan to do. These were mostly led by Mihaly's on the arm side.
[08:40.560 --> 08:46.640]  I saw the discussion on Nova on Intel CET and ShadowStack. We have work done over there. So the
[08:46.640 --> 08:51.520]  estimate is that around March. We're going to integrate that. And then, yeah, the ASLR and
[08:52.880 --> 08:58.080]  data execution prevention now with paging support should be also available. Risk 5 support is
[08:58.080 --> 09:04.800]  basically implemented, but with a lead from Mihaly's, we are doing a plattery architecting
[09:04.800 --> 09:09.680]  discussion. And after that is complete, then risk 5 support together with support for other
[09:09.680 --> 09:16.480]  VMMs and hypervisors, VMware, Hyper-V. Firecracker is going to be upstreamed.
[09:19.280 --> 09:23.440]  Well, what I've seen, and this is kind of more on the community management side,
[09:23.440 --> 09:31.280]  items that we are facing as challenging in community and we are kind of adapting to them,
[09:31.280 --> 09:39.360]  is making the product easy to use. There's a bit of struggle on that. Once we fully transition to
[09:39.360 --> 09:44.240]  a mature craft kit, our companion tool, that should make things a lot easier. Basically,
[09:44.240 --> 09:50.400]  just kind of push a button to make things happen. Now that we have muscle support,
[09:50.400 --> 09:55.360]  and now with binary compatibility support, my expectation is that new applications are going
[09:55.360 --> 10:02.560]  to be easy to be ported and then be improved. It's important to also attract experienced
[10:02.560 --> 10:07.440]  contributors. So we are very welcoming to newcomers. We do, however, of course, rely on
[10:07.440 --> 10:13.840]  experienced developers, contributors to drive the major items going. So that's been mostly
[10:13.840 --> 10:19.760]  happening in the core team with Simone, Mark, Marco and Michalis. We want to get more people to
[10:19.760 --> 10:25.200]  work on that. Also, we are working on improving code quality. There is a discussion we are having,
[10:25.200 --> 10:31.760]  and I'm hoping that in the next month or so, we're going to finish up the coding guidelines,
[10:31.760 --> 10:37.600]  making sure we follow a consistent coding style throughout the source code,
[10:38.880 --> 10:47.360]  and giving those good practices in the community. As a kind of call for contributions,
[10:47.360 --> 10:53.840]  come to the monkey side, we have a lot of items for everyone. So, of course, it's the chorus part.
[10:53.840 --> 11:00.320]  If you are fond of C, low-level assembly language, virtualization, there's work to be done there.
[11:00.480 --> 11:06.640]  If you want to work on tooling, Alex is driving that, so go containers, Kubernetes,
[11:06.640 --> 11:12.800]  CICD, you can join that. Language support, such as I said with Martin, we draw support
[11:12.800 --> 11:19.680]  all the others, so there is work being done. We want to expand the ecosystem of applications
[11:19.680 --> 11:24.880]  and languages, so any language you want that's going to be done there. There was actually a
[11:24.880 --> 11:30.800]  discussion with someone who was working on some JSON toolkit if I recall, so that's going to be it.
[11:30.800 --> 11:35.680]  So, there's any sort of preference on library programming language or application you want
[11:35.680 --> 11:40.560]  is going to be there, and then, of course, performance, benchmarking, doing measurements,
[11:40.560 --> 11:46.400]  there's plenty of items to work on there. So, we'll welcome you. Please join. You can see on
[11:46.400 --> 11:51.600]  Discord, you can look at the beginner tasks, you can join the hackathon and find out more.
[11:52.160 --> 11:58.720]  And finally, this is something I discussed briefly also last evening for those of you
[11:58.720 --> 12:04.800]  who still remember. It was a bit late after some beer consumption had occurred. So,
[12:05.760 --> 12:11.760]  I would like to start a unicolonial discussion group to share knowledge, to share the code base,
[12:11.760 --> 12:18.640]  to see what we are doing. I think that will improve a lot the unicolonial ecosystem and
[12:18.640 --> 12:25.360]  improve each project. For example, we've been using tons of feature from OSV. There's quite a bit
[12:25.360 --> 12:30.480]  of code that was, as you might know, borrowed from Stefan and from Pierre, at least on the
[12:30.480 --> 12:36.320]  back of the website and some others. So, there's plenty of things that we can do if we are together,
[12:36.320 --> 12:42.960]  and that will also help promote more unicolonials in the OSS community in academia and also create
[12:42.960 --> 12:48.480]  products from it. So, I'm going to contact you guys to see how we can actually make this happen.
[12:48.480 --> 12:53.360]  I don't have a clear kind of goal. I'm more of a process type of person. Let's make things happen
[12:53.360 --> 12:59.760]  and then improve on it. But I think it's kind of a very good time now given the cloud, the
[12:59.760 --> 13:06.560]  cloud business ecosystem, the academic ecosystem and Unicolonial OS, also the educational
[13:06.560 --> 13:11.040]  prospect that they provide to do this. That being said, thank you so much. As I said,
[13:11.040 --> 13:16.240]  the community is strong. You can find out more about Unicraft over there, and we'll wait for
[13:16.240 --> 13:23.600]  questions after Simon's presentation. Thank you.
